# Meta-Evaluation System Overview

## Goals and Purpose

(1) To select the best evaluation method to use for argument condensation. We are essentially evaluating which evaluator to use, which is why it's called metaevaluation. But in addition to choosing the best evaluator from a list of evaluators we also want to...

(2) Validate the evaluator we choose. Otherwise we wouldn't know whether our evaluation method is actually aligned with human preference. If our evaluator deems an argument list to be a 8/10, we want have confidence that the same argument list wouldn't correspond to a completely different evaluation, say 5/10, according to humans.

## Approach

We create a metaevaluation test set. It consists of multiple test cases. A single test case is defined by the following parameters:
  - Example output arguments. Normally, these would be generated by the argument condensation system. Because condensation logic is not yet implemented, we manually create example argument lists for testing the evaluators. 
  - The golden output to compare against. A curated list of arguments we expect the example output arguments to have a high correspondence with (at least in theory). 
  - The "correct" score the LLM should give for the system output (0-10). We are interested in how well the evaluator can align with this human-given score. 
  - Explanation of why the human gave this score to the example argument list. What was missing? Was there something that wasn't present in the golden dataset at all? This information is good not only for traceability of the process of choosing an evaluator but also for potentially using an LLM to analyze why an evaluator is not aligned. 

## Usage:
(1) define evaluators in evaluation/evaluators
(2) define test cases in evaluation/metaEvaluation/testData/likertPros/fi (and testData/likertCons/fi)
(3) run the command: yarn tsx new_src/evaluation/metaEvaluation/runMetaEvaluationCLI.ts
--> this will automatically load the evaluators (excluding the stub and abstract evaluator) and give you analytics on evaluator performance to help you choose and improve the best one
